*************************
*** Installing Phycas ***
*************************

Phycas is not pure Python, and requires the Boost build system, making it
difficult to distribute in the ordinary python way (using setup.py and either
pip or easy_install). With previous versions of Phycas, we have tried to create
rather complex wrappers and installers, but have settled on a much simpler
solution going forward: Phycas is now distributed as a zip (windows) or
compressed tar (mac, linux) archive that you simply copy into your python
site-packages directory.

Because Phycas is primarily built using C++, you must install a version of
Phycas that matches your specific version of Python and operating system. We
only create pre-built versions for (what we hope are the) most popular versions
of the Mac and Windows operating systems and Python versions. There are
currently only two combinations available:

Mac:
    OS: Mavericks (MacOS 10.9)
    Python: 2.7.5 (comes with Mavericks)

Windows:
    OS: Windows 7
    Python: 2.7.6

Most users will prefer to use Phycas on a departmental or university linux
cluster rather than tying up their laptop or desktop with long analyses, and
thus instructions are provided below for obtaining the source code and building
Phycas under a linux operating system.

############
### NOTE ###
############
The instructions below use 2.0.x to refer to the most recent version rather than
2.0.0, 2.0.1, etc. The x indicates versions that differ from 2.0.0 only in bug
fixes.

*****************************************************************
*** Installing Phycas on a Mac running MacOS 10.9 (Mavericks) ***
*****************************************************************
1. Start by downloading phycas-2.0.x-mac.tar.gz from http://phycas.org/.

2. Move phycas-2.0.x-mac.tar.gz to your home directory

3. Open Terminal.app (Finder > Go > Utilities)

4. Type the following command to open a Finder window showing your home directory:

   open .

Verify that phycas-2.0.x-mac.tar.gz is in that directory (if not, move it there).

5. Verify the location of your site-packages directory using the following
command (copy and paste into Terminal.app):

   python -c "import site; print site.getsitepackages()"

The second item in the list should be "/Library/Python/2.7/site-packages"

6. Unpack phycas-2.0.x-mac.tar.gz into your site-packages directory:

   sudo tar -C /Library/Python/2.7/site-packages -zxvf phycas-2.0.x-mac.tar.gz

The "sudo" at the beginning runs the command as the superuser, so you will need
to supply your system password to continue. The "-C" provides tar with the
directory into which the archive should be extracted. Finally, the "zxvf" means
uncompress (z), extract (x), verbose (v) and "the file I want you to uncompress
and extract follows" (f).

7. Test your Phycas installation (copy/paste the following into Terminal.app):

   python -c "from phycas import *"

You should see the following output:

  /////////////////////////////
 ///// Welcome to Phycas /////
/////////////////////////////
Version 2.0.x

Phycas is written by Paul O. Lewis, Mark Holder and David Swofford

Phycas is distributed under the GNU Public License (see LICENSE file for more
information).

8. If you ever want to completely remove Phycas from your system, delete the
phycas-2.0.x-mac.tar.gz file (if it is still in your home directory) and issue
the following command to delete the extracted phycas folder from the Python
site-packages directory:

   sudo rm -rf /Library/Python/2.7/site-packages/phycas

If you are squeamish, open the /Library/Python/2.7/site-packages in Finder using
the following command (copy and paste into Terminal.app):

   open /Library/Python/2.7/site-packages

delete the phycas directory by selecting it and deleting it using Ctrl-delete.
Because you are now in the bowels of the MacOS, you will be asked for your
system password before the folder is actually deleted. One advantage of this
approach is that it will end up in Trash (things deleted with the "rm" command
are just deleted immediately).

***************************************************
*** Installing Phycas on a PC running Windows 7 ***
***************************************************
1. These instructions assume that you installed Python at the base of the C:\
drive, and thus the directory C:\Python27 exists. If you installed it somewhere
else, please adjust the instructions accordingly.

2. Start by downloading phycas-2.0.x-win.zip from http://phycas.org/.

3. Move phycas-2.0.x-win.zip to the Python site-packages directory, which is here:

   C:\Python27\Lib\site-packages

4. If you have 7-Zip  (http://www.7-zip.org/) installed (highly recommended,
*much* faster than the native zip file extractor supplied with Windows),
right-click the phycas-2.0.x-win.zip file and select "7-Zip > Extract Here" from
the popup menu. If you insist on using the native unzip program, right-click the
phycas-2.0.x-win.zip file and select "Extract All..." from the popup menu.

5. Test your Phycas installation by opening a command console window by
shift-right-clicking on the C:\Python27 directory in Explorer and choosing "Open
command window here". Then type the following at the C:\Python27> prompt:

   python.exe -c "from phycas import *"

You should see the following output:

  /////////////////////////////
 ///// Welcome to Phycas /////
/////////////////////////////
Version 2.0.x

Phycas is written by Paul O. Lewis, Mark Holder and David Swofford

Phycas is distributed under the GNU Public License (see LICENSE file for more
information).

6. If you get an error, verify that the site-packages directory being used by
Python is indeed the one you copied phycas-2.0.x-win.zip into:

   python.exe -c "import site; print site.getsitepackages()"

The second item in the list should be "C:\\Python27\\lib\\site-packages". If it
is not, you need to repeat steps 2-4 using the site-packages directory listed.

7. If you ever want to completely remove Phycas from your system, simply delete
the phycas-2.0.x-win.zip file (if you haven't already) and the phycas directory
in your site-packages directory.

***********************************
*** Building Phycas under linux ***
***********************************
1. Install Boost C++ library:
    a. Download boost_1_55_0.tar.gz from http://www.boost.org/ and unpack into
    your home directory:

        cd $HOME
        curl -L
        http://sourceforge.net/projects/boost/files/boost/1.55.0/boost_1_55_0.
        tar.gz/download > boost_1_55_0.tar.gz
        tar zxvf boost_1_55_0.tar.gz

    b. cd into boost_1_55_0 and run the following commands to compile the thread
    and python libraries:

        cd $HOME/boost_1_55_0
        ./bootstrap.sh --with-libraries=system,chrono,thread,python
        ./b2

       Note: if you have installed and want to use a different version of
       python, you need to tell Boost where to find this version of python:

        ./bootstrap.sh --with-python=/opt/python/bin/python --with-libraries=system,chrono,thread,python

2. Install the Nexus Class Library (NCL):
    a.  Download ncl-2.1.18.tar.gz from http://sourceforge.net/projects/ncl/ and
    unpack into your home directory:

        cd $HOME
        curl -L http://sourceforge.net/projects/ncl/files/latest/download > ncl-2.1.18.tar.gz
        tar zxvf ncl-2.1.18.tar.gz

    b.  Configure, make and install:

        cd $HOME/ncl-2.1.18
        ./configure
        sudo make install

    c.  If you do not have sudo privileges, you can specify

        cd $HOME/ncl-2.1.18
        ./configure --prefix=$HOME/nclib
        make install

3. Build Phycas
    a.  Download phycas-2.0.x-src.tar.gz from http://phycas.org/ and unpack into
    your home directory:

        cd $HOME
        curl -L http://www.eeb.uconn.edu/projects/phycas/downloads/v2.0.x/phycas-2.0.x-src.tar.gz > phycas-2.0.x-src.tar.gz
        tar zxvf phycas-2.0.x-src.tar.gz
        cd phycas-2.0.x

    c.  Copy build.sh from scripts directory to $HOME/phycas-2.0.x and in the
    copy specify values for these variables:
            OSTYPE="linux"
            BOOST_ROOT="$HOME/boost_1_55_0"
            BJAM_DIR="$BOOST_ROOT/tools/build/v2/engine/bin.linuxx86_64"
            PYTHON_ROOT="/opt/python/bin/python" (or whatever path to your python interpreter you supplied to $HOME/boost_1_55_0/bootstrap.sh)
            NCL_INSTALL_DIR="/usr/local" (or "$HOME/nclib" if you do not have sudo privileges)

    d.  Now run it

        cd $HOME/phycas-2.0.x
        ./build.sh

    e.  Copy $HOME/phycas/phycas to your site-packages directory (or unpack the
    $HOME/phycas/phycas-2.0.x-linux.tar.gz file there) to complete the
    installation (if you lack sudo privileges, go to step f). To find out where
    your Python's site-packages directory is located, use the following command
    in Python 2.7:

        python -c "import site; print site.getsitepackages()"

        or this command if using Python 2.6:

        python -c "from distutils.sysconfig import get_python_lib; print get_python_lib()"

    f. If you lack sudo privileges, you can specify these before invoking python:

        export PYTHONPATH="$HOME/phycas-2.0.x"
        export LD_LIBRARY_PATH="$HOME/phycas-2.0.x/phycas/conversions:$HOME/nclib/lib/ncl"

        The PYTHONPATH environmental variable tells Python where to find the
        phycas module (the phycas module is the phycas directory nested within
        $HOME/phycas-2.0.x). The LD_LIBRARY_PATH allows the operating system to
        locate dynamic link libraries needed when Phycas is running. When Phycas
        is built, all dynamic link libraries except for NCL are copied into the
        conversions directory, and the NCL dynamic link library will end up
        inside the lib/ncl directory of the directory specified as the install
        prefix when NCL was built.

        When running Phycas on a cluster that uses SGE for job management, you
        must include these environmental variables in your qsub script. For
        example, create a file named myjob.sh containing these lines:

        #$ -S /bin/bash
        #$ -cwd
        #$ -N myjobname
        export PYTHONPATH="$HOME/phycas-2.0.x"
        export LD_LIBRARY_PATH="$HOME/phycas-2.0.x/phycas/conversions:$HOME/nclib/lib/ncl"
        /usr/bin/python runphycas.py

        Assuming the current directory contains a file named runphycas.py
        containing the Phycas commands you want to execute, you can submit the
        job using qsub as follows:

        qsub myjob.sh

    g. You should now run the tests to ensure that Phycas was installed correctly:

        cd $HOME/phycas-2.0.x/tests
        python runall.py

        After the tests are finished, the file diffs.txt should contain only the
        titles of all tests run and no error messages.

